arXiv:2208.00733v1  [cs.ET]  1 Aug 2022
IEEE IOT MAGAZINE, VOL. XX, NO. X, X 2022
1
The Rise of Quantum Internet Computing
Seng W. Loke, Member, IEEE
Abstract—This article highlights quantum Internet computing as referring to distributed quantum computing over the quantum Internet,
analogous to (classical) Internet computing involving (classical) distributed computing over the (classical) Internet. Relevant to
quantum Internet computing would be areas of study such as quantum protocols for distributed nodes using quantum information for
computations, quantum cloud computing, delegated veriﬁable blind or private computing, non-local gates, and distributed quantum
applications, over Internet-scale distances.
Index Terms—quantum Internet computing, quantum Internet, distributed quantum computing, Internet computing, distributed
systems, Internet
”This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this
version may no longer be accessible.”
✦
1
INTRODUCTION
T
HERE have been tremendous developments in quantum
computing, quantum cryptography, quantum commu-
nications and the quantum Internet, and we have seen
increased investments and intensive research in quantum
computing in recent years [1], [2]. The quantum Internet will
not necessarily replace the (classical) Internet we know and
use today, at least not in the near future, but can complement
the current Internet. The quantum Internet aims to enable
robust quantum teleportation (or transmission) of qubits,1
and entanglement among qubits,2 over long Internet-scale
distances, which are key to many of the quantum protocols
including quantum key distribution, quantum voting, and
others, as well as for non-local control of quantum gates.
There have been efforts to build quantum computers,
and it remains to see if any one paradigm becomes the
dominant or best way of building such quantum comput-
ers. At the same time, even as researchers develop more
powerful quantum computers (supporting more qubits for
operations, and at lower error rates), there is an opportunity
for connecting multiple quantum computers from differ-
ent sites to achieve much more complex quantum com-
putations, i.e., inter-linking multiple quantum computers
on different sites to perform distributed computing with
a distributed system of quantum computers (or quantum
processing units (QPUs) at different nodes), arriving at the
notion of distributed quantum computing, e.g., [3].
While distributed quantum computing can involve mul-
tiple QPUs next to each other or at the same site, with the
quantum Internet, one can envision distributed quantum
•
Seng W. Loke is with the School of Information Technology, Deakin
University, Melbourne, Australia.
E-mail: see https://www.deakin.edu.au/about-deakin/people/seng-loke.
Manuscript received X XX, 20XX; revised X XX, 20XX.
1. A qubit is the basic unit of quantum information, and can be
thought of as a two-state, or two-levelled, quantum-mechanical system,
such as an electron’s spin, where the two levels are spin up and spin
down, or a photon’s polarization, where the two states are the vertical
polarization and the horizontal polarization.
2. Multiple qubits at different sites can share an entangled state, a
superpositon of “specially correlated” states, to be used in distributed
algorithms.
computing over nodes geographically far apart. As noted
in [4], the idea is the quantum Internet as the “underly-
ing infrastructure of the Distributed Quantum Computing
ecosystem.”
This article highlights the emerging area of distributed
quantum computing over the quantum Internet, which we
refer to as quantum Internet computing, i.e., the idea of com-
puting using quantumly connected distributed quantum
computers over Internet-scale distances. Hence, quantum
Internet computing is not a new concept in itself but a
proposed “umbrella term” used here for the collection of
topics (listed below), from an analogy to (classical) Internet
computing.
Internet computing, where one does distributed comput-
ing but over Internet-scale distances and distributed sys-
tems involve nodes connected via the Internet, is at the inter-
section of work in (classical) distributed computing and the
(classical) Internet. Analogous to Internet computing, one
could ask the question of what would be at the intersection
of work in distributed quantum computing and work on the
quantum Internet, which brings us to the notion of quantum
Internet computing.
Also, while the quantum Internet and distributed quan-
tum computing are still nascent research areas, there are at
least three key topics which can be considered as relevant to
quantum Internet computing:
•
distributed quantum computing, including quantum
protocols from theoretical perspectives involving
communication complexity studies, and distributed
quantum computing via non-local or distributed
quantum gates,
•
quantum cloud computing with a focus on delegat-
ing quantum computations, blind quantum comput-
ing, and verifying delegated quantum computations,
and
•
computations and algorithms for the quantum Inter-
net including key ideas such as quantum entangle-
ment distillation, entanglement swapping, quantum

IEEE IOT MAGAZINE, VOL. XX, NO. X, X 2022
2
repeaters, and quantum Internet standards.3
We brieﬂy discuss the above topics in the following sections.
2
DISTRIBUTED QUANTUM COMPUTING
Distributed quantum computing problems and quantum
protocols have been well-studied for over two decades,
from a theoretical computer science perspective,4 many of
which have their inspiration from classical distributed com-
puting research. Quantum versions of classical distributed
computing problems and protocols, and new forms of dis-
tributed computing using quantum information, have been
explored, e.g., the distributed three-party product problem,
the distributed Deutsch-Jozsa promise problem and the
distributed intersection problem, demonstrating how, for
some problems, quantum information can enable fewer
bits of communication to be used for a solution, and how
certain distributed computation problems can be solved
with quantum information, but cannot be solved classically.
Many quantum protocols, including quantum coin ﬂipping,
quantum leader election, quantum anonymous broadcast-
ing, quantum voting, quantum Byzantine Generals, quan-
tum secret sharing, and quantum oblivious transfer, can
be viewed as “quantum versions” of classical distributed
computing problems, and have been studied extensively.
Another area of study, which has also been considered
as distributed quantum computing, is non-local gates, or
the non-local control of quantum gates, including early
work nearly over two decades ago.5 Key to performing
such non-local control of quantum gates is the use of en-
tanglement, which can be viewed as a resource for such
non-local computations. More recent work has looked at
how to partition the computations of distributed quantum
circuits over multiple QPUs, e.g., [3] as we mentioned earlier
- with considerations including distributing computations
in such a way as to optimize performance and to reduce the
requirements on entanglement, since if the entanglements
required are generated at too low a rate, this will hold up
computations. The key motivation here is to inter-link a
set of quantum computers to form effectively a much more
powerful quantum computer.
3
QUANTUM CLOUD COMPUTING AND DELEGAT-
ING QUANTUM COMPUTATIONS
We have seen big tech companies and startups offering
quantum computing as a service similar to accessing other
cloud service offerings, which is a fantastic resource for
experimentation and studies.
More formally, studies into delegating quantum com-
putation from a client (which can be either classical, or
almost classical, i.e., with minimal capability to perform
3. For example, see https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-irtf-qirg-principles-10.html
[last accessed: 1/8/2022]
4. For example, see Buhrman and R¨ohrig’s paper dating back to
2003: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-540-45138-9 1
[last accessed: 1/8/2022]
5. For example, see the work by Yimsiriwattana and Lomonaco
Jr.
in
https://arxiv.org/pdf/quant-ph/0402148.pdf
and
a
distributed
version
of
Shor’s
famous
factorization
algorithm
https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.05976 [last accessed: 1/8/2022]
computations such as teleporting qubits, applying simple
Pauli quantum operations, and doing basic measurements)
which is much more restricted than the server (assumed
to be a universal quantum computer) have been studied,
called delegated quantum computing. And when the server
is prevented from knowing the client’s inputs but still can
perform delegated computations, by a technique such as
the quantum one-time pad (where the client applies Pauli
operations to add uncertainty from the server’s perspective,
thereby effectively encrypting the quantum inputs it sends
to the server, and keeps track of operations it later needs
to decrypt the outputs from the server), this is called blind
quantum computing.
In order to be sure that the server does indeed perform
the required quantum operations delegated to it by the
client, the client can embed tests (or test runs) into the
delegated computations, so that the server (not being able
to distinguish between tests and normal computations) can
be caught out if it did not perform the required compu-
tations properly. That is, the client can verify if the server
performed the required quantum computations.6 Further
abstractions for delegating quantum computations with
supporting cloud services continues to be investigated.
4
THE QUANTUM INTERNET
As we mentioned earlier, work on the quantum Internet
focuses on how to efﬁciently enable robust entanglement
shared among qubits over long geographical distances. If
two nodes in different continents share entangled states,
then, this can be a resource to do non-local gates, i.e.,
to perform distributed quantum computations, and enable
quantum protocols over Internet-scale distances.
There have been the use of satellites to enable long dis-
tance entanglement, as well as the use of optical ﬁbre cables
to demonstrate entanglement. Key to the quantum Internet
are ideas such as entanglement swapping and quantum
repeaters, including ideas such quantum distillation, to
achieve high ﬁdelity distributed entangled states over long
distances, and quantum error correction - this continues to
be a research endeavour as mentioned earlier [2].
There are other interesting distributed quantum appli-
cations to be considered including quantum cryptography,
quantum sensing, and quantum positioning systems.
5
DISTRIBUTED QUANTUM COMPUTING OVER THE
QUANTUM INTERNET: QUANTUM INTERNET COM-
PUTING AND THE QUANTUM IOT?
Apart from the many quantum computers available over
the cloud by big tech and startups which work at very
low temperatures, room temperature quantum computers
have also started to emerge.7 This could pave the way
for quantum computers at the fog and at the edge, not
just in remote clouds, and perhaps even mobile quantum
6. An
excellent
example
is
the
work
by
Broadbent
at
https://theoryofcomputing.org/articles/v014a011/
[last
accessed:
1/8/2022]
7. See https://spectrum.ieee.org/nitrogen-vacancy-diamond-quantum-computer-
and also https://otd.harvard.edu/explore-innovation/technologies/scalable-room-t
[last accessed: 1/8/2022]

IEEE IOT MAGAZINE, VOL. XX, NO. X, X 2022
3
computers, or quantum computers embedded into every-
day devices and objects, if ever! Will we then have the
quantum Internet of Things (IoT)? The answer remains to
be seen, and “quantum entangled things across the world”
will likely complement the classical IoT. Future applications
and potential of quantum Internet computing remains to
be investigated. Meanwhile, others have begun to look at
the connection between 6G networking and the quantum
Internet [5].
REFERENCES
[1] W.
Kozlowski
and
S.
Wehner,
“Towards
large-scale
quantum
networks,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
Sixth
Annual
ACM
International
Conference
on
Nanoscale
Computing
and
Communication, ser. NANOCOM ’19.
New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3345312.3345497
[2] P. P. Rohde, The Quantum Internet: The Second Quantum Revolution.
Cambridge University Press, 2021.
[3] R. Parekh, A. Ricciardi, A. Darwish, and S. DiAdamo, “Quantum
algorithms and simulation for parallel and distributed quantum
computing,” in 2021 IEEE/ACM Second International Workshop on
Quantum Computing Software (QCS), 2021, pp. 9–19.
[4] D. Cuomo, M. Calefﬁ, and A. S. Cacciapuoti, “Towards a distributed
quantum computing ecosystem,” IET Quantum Communication,
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 3–8, 2020.
[5] C. Wang and A. Rahman, “Quantum-enabled 6g wireless net-
works: Opportunities and challenges,” IEEE Wireless Communica-
tions, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 58–69, 2022.
