Correspondence to: Denis Newman-Griffis,   
AI Thinking: 
A framework for rethinking artificial intelligence in practice 
 
 
Denis Newman-Griffis 
Information School, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK 
Research on Research Institute, London, UK  
 
Abstract 
Artificial intelligence is transforming the way we work with information across disciplines and 
practical contexts. A growing range of disciplines are now involved in studying, developing, 
and assessing the use of AI in practice, but these disciplines often employ conflicting 
understandings of what AI is and what is involved in its use. New, interdisciplinary approaches 
are needed to bridge competing conceptualisations of AI in practice and help shape the future of 
AI use. I propose a novel conceptual framework called AI Thinking, which models key 
decisions and considerations involved in AI use across disciplinary perspectives. The AI 
Thinking model addresses five practice-based competencies involved in applying AI in context: 
motivating AI use in information processes, formulating AI methods, assessing available tools 
and technologies, selecting appropriate data, and situating AI in the sociotechnical contexts it is 
used in. A hypothetical case study is provided to illustrate the application of AI Thinking in 
practice. This article situates AI Thinking in broader cross-disciplinary discourses of AI, 
including its connections to ongoing discussions around AI literacy and AI-driven innovation. 
AI Thinking can help to bridge divides between academic disciplines and diverse contexts of AI 
use, and to reshape the future of AI in practice. 
 
Keywords: Artificial intelligence; interdisciplinarity; AI applications; machine learning; AI 
Thinking; Critical data studies 
1. Introduction 
Artificial intelligence has been positioned as a key driver of global change through a fourth 
industrial revolution, and AI advances are actively transforming how we process, analyse, and 
learn from information (1–3). The increasing relevance of AI across disciplines and sectors has 
led to a wide variety of views on the nature of this transformation, but it is most often envisioned 
through a technological lens: self-contained AI technologies that change (or replace) the 
processes we use to work with information. However, the technology-centric perspective that 
drives much of AI development and innovation fails to capture important aspects of the complex, 

AI Thinking: A framework for rethinking artificial intelligence in practice 
 
2 
human contexts in which AI is used, and is increasingly insufficient to address the challenges of 
effectively and ethically using AI in real-world settings (4–6). 
 
The ongoing changes in the AI landscape are not only affecting the scope and scale of AI use: 
they are also reshaping what it looks like to work with AI technologies in practice. For most of 
its history, AI has been a specialised, technical discipline, focused on methodological innovation 
and