THE STRUCTURE OF THE CLIMATE DEBATE 
 
Richard S.J. Tol 
Department of Economics, University of Sussex, Falmer, United Kingdom 
Institute for Environmental Studies, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
Department of Spatial Economics, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
Tinbergen Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
CESifo, Munich, Germany 
 
19 August 2016 
 
Abstract 
First-best climate policy is a uniform carbon tax which gradually rises over time. Civil 
servants have complicated climate policy to expand bureaucracies, politicians to create rents. 
Environmentalists have exaggerated climate change to gain influence, other activists have 
joined the climate bandwagon. Opponents to climate policy have attacked the weaknesses in 
climate research. The climate debate is convoluted and polarized as a result, and climate 
policy complex. Climate policy should become easier and more rational as the Paris 
Agreement has shifted climate policy back towards national governments. Changing political 
priorities, austerity, and a maturing bureaucracy should lead to a more constructive climate 
debate. 
 
Key words 
Climate policy; political economy 
 
JEL Classification 
F53, P16, Q54 
 
1. Introduction 
The best course of action for greenhouse gas emission reduction and adaptation to climate 
change has been subject to debate for three decades. Much less attention has been paid to the 
nature and structure of the climate debate, and why certain actors adopt the position that they 
do. In this paper, I use basic tools of political economy and the economics of organizations, 
as well as the philosophy of science and social psychology, to analyse the climate debate. 
Economists have contributed large volumes of research on international environmental 
agreements and the architecture of international climate policy, and copious amounts of 
papers on the design of greenhouse gas emission reduction policies and policy instrument 
choice in the first- and second-best. Economists have been reluctant, however, to write much 
about the climate debate itself and apply their tools of analysis to the question why 
participants in this debate behave the way they do. This paper makes a first attempt. 

Climate policy has moved slowly. This frustrates many, whether on the side of those who 
advocate for rapid emission reduction or of the opinion that climate policy is a nonsense best 
forgotten. In either case, it helps to understand why the discussion is as it is, why people 
argue as they do, and why climate policy has neither gone away nor moved to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions. This paper makes a start in answering these questions. The method 
chosen is discursive rather than analytical, but readers who prefer analytics and econometrics 
just have to follow the references. 
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 revisits the case for climate policy. Section 3 
sketches the optimal design of climate policy. These sections are kept short 